# Vision


The vision package uses the µStreamer library / software package on the ROV-side, to transmit data. That is compatible with MJPEG encoding. 

A video is a series of moving pictures. A picture is a grid of colors. Transmitting a raw video feed over the network would be inefficient, because it would involve sending every color value (RGB) for every pixel, in every picture / frame for that video stream. Thus, the process of encoding, or compression, allows us to save bandwidth. 

There are a variety of different encoding / compression algorithms, for video, images, text, etc. One common compression tool is a zip file - that allows a group of files to take up less space, while still preserving all of the information in those files. 

For video, there are quite a few - for example, H.264, which is commonly used for both internet videos (ex. YouTube) or livestreams. The reason this doesn't make sense for the ROV, is because H.264 relies on encoding groups of frames together, to save space by focusing on differences between those images. (This is a vast oversimplification - feel free to research this yourself). While this is a good solution for livestreams and videos, where processing can be buffered (in the case of a livestream, often 1-5s delay makes no difference). However, on the ROV, we want every frame as soon as we can get it - not on a longer delay. 

JPEG encoding is a way to compress an image. You can research how JPEG compression works, but for our purposes, all it does is compress an image to take up less space, and it only requires an image. This is crucial for the ROV, since we want to essentially encode a frame and send it to the top-side, before recieving the next image from the camera. 

MJPEG is a format which is a moving-JPEG stream, which essentially sends a bunch of JPEGs, which can be understood as a video. This makes sense, because again, it minimizes delay at the per frame level. 

Leviathan & Snowfox, the control system we used in 2024-2025, written in C++ and Rust, also used a version of MJPEG. Though they did not formally name / identify it as MJPEG, that's what was being done - OpenCV would compress the image into a JPEG, send it over, and each JPEG would be rendered on teh topside to create a video stream. In fact, this system has been used (that I know of) since the 2022-2023 system (called Seamoth, written in Python). 

As is known, the 24-25 control system had issues and challenges. Namely, it was prone to network failures, not resilient to said network failures, struggled with latency and quality. It used MJPEG as well, so why was it so different from the current one?

There are a couple key issues, which are improved in the new control system. First, the 24-25 control system (I believe) used a raw UDP socket, and had a custom implementation for handshakes and connection logic. Secondly, the MJPEG implementation was not only custom, but relied on OpenCV CPU encoding, which by itself is not bad, but means that latency and quality relies on image encoding from the CPU, which is slow and difficult. The final competition setup was worsened by last minute failure on / damage to our Raspberry Pi 5, so we downgraded to a Pi 4 1GB. 

µStreamer uses an HTTP connection, which ensures data integrity. Though this would seem to be a problem, as with camera data, latency is far more important than ensuring precise data integrity, it actually didn't seem to add much latency, and made a lot of implementation logic and reliability easier. HTTP handles connection and reconnection logic, so that makes restarting from network failure very easy. 

Secondly, µStreamer integrates with V4L2 well, so it is easy to swap between cameras and encoders. Using the USB (UVC compatible) webcams we have, we were able to use the hardware encoders on the cameras themselves. Hardware encoding on the cameras is very fast, comparable and often better than hardware encoding on a computer. You can [learn more about](https://coralcrusaders.org/technical-blog/f/technical-blog-1-low-latency-digital-video) another MATE team that did a similar thing, but with specialized underwater cameras, whose hardware encoding is even better. Shout out to the Coral Crusaders - this blog was a big inspiration to look into such encoding methods with more detail. 

One really good implementation detail which was re-used / re-implemented from Leviathan was that of hardware decoding / direct rendering. By defualt, µStreamer is designed to just render in a browser, which though easy because it does not require a dedicated client / video playing software, can compromise latency, because it relies on the browser's rendering cycle. Essentially, the video renders in the browser (which is optimized primarily for HTML / text, and not video streaming), and then the browser is rendered to the screen. Again this is a vast oversimplification, but is a good analogy for the process. In Leviathan, OpenGL through GLFW was used to render directly to the GPU / screen / hardware. 

In the current control system, MPV, a video playing app, is used as the client / video player, because it handles video decoding and rendering for us. It also has options which enable low-latency live streaming (namely preffering the newest frames, low latency mode, not buffering, etc). 

MPV typically runs as a standalone application, like any other on a computer. However, it also has a library version, called libmpv, which is designed to embed into applications. We use Python-MPV, which is a Python wrapper for libmpv. For the desktop app part of the software, we use PySide6, a Python interface for Qt, a cross-platform (MacOS, Windows, Linux), desktop application framework. By embedding MPV into an OpenGL widget within PySide6 (ik that sounds like buzzwords), we're able to control MPV using Python, have it inside a Python desktop app, while still rendering directly to the GPU, which is key to having low latency. To explain the process with more detail, OpenGL is a GPU / rendering library. PySide6 has an OpenGLWidget, which basically connects PySide to OpenGL rendering, which we then place MPV into. Truthfully, I'm not 100% on the nuts and bolts of everything, but you can research that further. 

To confirm our improvements, we benchmarked both systems. We were looking at a few performance indicators - namely, latency, quality, and resource usage. 

To measure glass to glass latency (the delay between what is showing on the screen, and exactly what is happening in real life), we set up the camera in front of a stop watch, put the control box next to said stop watch, and took a picture of the control box's video display and the live stopwatch. This isn't perfect because of image processing artifacts and rolling shutter, however, we found the new control system to have a latency of ~70ms to ~100ms. This is compared to the old control system which had a latency of ~230ms to ~280ms. We were able to use a variety of qualities, from 640x480, all the way up to 1080p. Ultimately the resolution of the monitor we are using is only 1080p, full screen, so we limited our resolution on the production system to 720p. The RAM usage of the µSteamer processes generally peaked at 5%, hovering around 1%, and CPU usage also hovering around 3%, but honestly, I don't 100% remember it that well. Such benchmarking is also an area for future expansion. 

For use with multiple cameras, we found that since the encoding was done on the camera hardware, the usage of µStreamer was so low that doubling it did not even come close to hitting any processing or RAM limits. However, there is an option to not send frames over the network / process them, if there isn't an HTTP client connected to recieve them (I don't remember what it's called - maybe slowmode or smth)? I could imagine that might be helpful with 4-6 cameras. 

We did not do much testing with FPS. We just left it at 30fps, which seemed to work, though that's an area for future expansion. 